We can now make use of Java's class loading in the factory pattern.
This will allow us to isolate different instances of the types that we create.
So what is the factory pattern?
The factory pattern is a constructor pattern,
and the way it works is something like this.
We have an abstract factory.
This is an abstract class that defines a factory,
and that factory will allow us to create instances of some type.
From this, we derive many concrete factories,
and it's these actual concrete factories that we use
to create the type that we need.
Associated with this we have a corresponding hierarchy of types,
so we have an abstract type and the corresponding concrete types.
One concrete factory will create one type of thing.
Another concrete factory will create another type of thing.
Within our application code, we'll code against the abstract factory,
and we'll code against the abstract type.
The primary idea behind the factory pattern is that it lets us
abstract away the construction of some type,
so we don't need to use the name of that type directly in our code,
and that makes things like testing easier,
for example.
So in this project,
we have a straightforward implementation of this abstract factory pattern.
So here we have an interface called ICameraFactory.
That's our abstract factory,
and that has concrete implementations of
NikonCameraFactory and CanonCameraFactory.
ICameraFactory has a method called CreateCamera, and that returns an ICamera.
The NikonCameraFactory returns a new NikonCamera,
and the CanonCameraFactory returns a new CanonCamera.
Both the NikonCamera and the CanonCamera implement ICamera.
ICamera has a method called takePhoto,
and the CanonCamera implements takePhoto and prints out Canon photo taken here.
And the NikonCamera also implements takePhoto and prints out Nikon photo taken.
And we can see a use of this in the main method here.
So inside main, we create a new NikonCameraFactory.
We call its CreateCamera method.
That's the builder method.
That's the factory method itself.
And then and the interface we call takePhoto.
And depending and whether we've built a
NikonCameraFactory here or a CanonCameraFactory here,
it'll print out the appropriate message here.
Notice we only code against the interface
ICameraFactory and the interface ICamera.
And if I run this code, we'll see it prints out Nikon photo taken,
as we'd expect, as it's using the NikonCameraFactory.
So there are a couple of things in this code we'd like to fix.
The first is that we're hardcoding the use of a NikonCameraFactory here.
And it might be that we'd like to configure that.
Along with that, when we deliver this code,
we're assuming use of NikonCameraFactory at a specific location,
something that's on the classpath.
And it may be we'd like to specify the location of a JAR file that
contains the code that we're going to use as well.
And we can fix both of those problems.
The first thing we will do is to use a configuration file.
In this case we'll use a JSON file.
And inside that file, we can specify a FactoryType as a string,
and in this case that will be com.pluralsight.NikonCameraFactory.
And we'll also specify a location where we'll have a JAR file, and
that JAR file contains the code that we'll use. That will contain
the factory code and the implementation codes of the concrete type
that we want to create.
So covering the configuration briefly, I have a Configuration class here, and
this class is going to read in the name of the config file,
extract the contents from that file.
We're then going to use the Jackson JSON parser,
and that has an ObjectMapper class,
and we can use this class to read the configuration information.
So we call mapper.readValue to read the data from the
contents into the Configuration class,
and we end up with a location and the factoryType.
So the code itself we'll add to this new class called ConfigurationMain.
This also has a main method.
The first thing we need to do here is to load the configuration.
So we do that by using our Configuration's static LoadConfiguration method,
passing it args[0].
Now, I'm doing no error checking here,
so I'm assuming that we're passing the name of the
configuration file as the first parameter to main.
Obviously, normally we would check that code. So I want
to be able to to use the location specified inside the
configuration to load classes,
so classes will be loaded from that configuration location.
So for that, we need to create a String called location,
and make that equal to configuration.getLocation. And then once we have that,
we can create a URL, call it url = new URL, and that will
contain the location we've just specified.
So in here we'll specify location, and that URL is then
ready to be used by a URLClassLoader.
So I can now say URLClassLoader ucl = new URLClassLoader, and I can just pass
it this array of URLs. So I can say new URL array and into this just pass in
the URL we've just created. Once we have this URL, we can then load an instance
of the factory, and we can do that by using Class.forName against the factory
names part of the configuration.
So the code will be something like Class.forName. To this
we're going to pass three parameters.
We're going to pass the name of the class,
so that's in configuration, so configuration.getFactoryType. We want to pass
true to say, I want this class initialized when it's loaded.
We want to pass this thing the URLClassLoader to be used to load the
class,and that's in ucl. Class.forName returns a class.
We can have this type safe, so we can return a class of a specific type.
And I want this to return a class of type ICameraFactory.
So I can say class ICameraFactory, cls = Class.forName.
We want to provide a cast here, so we place the cast in front.
So I now have a factory.
Once I have the class, I can now create an instance.
So I can say ICameraFactory cameraFactory = cls.newInstance. That lets me
create an instance of the factory itself, and then from the instance code I can
then say ICamera camera = cameraFactory.CreateCamera.
So we now have the camera that we want to use.
We can then call the camera's takePhoto method, and that
will print out the message to the console.
So if I run this by going to run the ConfigurationMain, the
main inside the ConfigurationMain class, then on the console
here we'll see Nikon photo taken,
so we get the same result but now this is highly configurable.
If we go into config.json and change this from NikonCameraFactory to
CanonCameraFactory and rerun the code, we get Canon photo taken. So
a simple change to a configuration file allows us to change the behavior of the application.